## Bengali to English poetry translation project

**Background (Why I did this project)**: I started my NLP journey in 2016 working on low-resource languages, 
particularly Bengali. Since then, I've always wanted to work on another project related to it, but never got the chance.
So, this summer, I took some time to do this passion project using some of the latest tools in NLP!

**Topic** (Initial Attempt): I began this project with an **extremely** ambitious setup - _Translating Rabindranath 
Tagore's poetry to English, but in the style of William Shakespeare._ Naturally, I'd be crazy to attempt something like
this, considering the complexity of the task, i.e., a model has to (i) understand complex Tagore poetry, (ii) map that 
to a different language (English) and, finally, (iii) imitate the style of the _Bard_. To this end, I tried to create
samples where the model is exposed to a similar _themed_ sonnet by Shakespeare, but ultimately, that didn't lead me
anywhere. The lesson learned here is that unless I have the relevant target data, it's pretty much impossible to do 
this task. **I refused to use synthetic data generated by a frontier model because I wanted the data to remain as close
to authentic as possible.**

**Topic** (This Project ✅): I realized that _translating_ Tagore's poetry from Bengali to English is challenging enough. 
As such, I decided to pursue that as a more realistic goal.
___

# PART-A: SFT

The first step in training an LLM for translation, is to acquire parallel data. I describe the data acquisition process
below, followed by my empirical observations.

## Dataset

For SFT, I used Rabindranath Tagore's Nobel Prize winning **Gitanjali** collection. He translated 103 poems from it 
into English. However, figuring out the mapping (which EN poem is the target of which BN poem) proved more challenging 
than I thought. This is how I assembled/scraped the data.

### BN-EN Mapping

This is a crucial step as not knowing which translation is mapped to which Bengali source wouldn't allow us to create 
the dataset. I used the mapping from _https://www.milansagar.com/gitanjali/suchiEng.html_. However, scraping this 
website was a nightmare because it used early anti-scraping tricks. This step created the `gitanjali_mapping.json` file.

### Full Poem Source

- I downloaded the _English_ translations from _Project Gutenberg_ (_https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/7164_). 
Of course, this was much easier to parse as it was cleaner and followed a structured format.
- I obtained the full Bengali poems from _Kaggle_ (_https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/aagalib/complete-works-of-rabindranath-tagore?resource=download_).

### Text Parsing

The titles from the BN-EN mapping allowed me to locate both Bengali/English texts in their respective source. However, 
as the original mapping site (in 1) was so, for the lack of a better word, crap 😆, I had to manually paste 37 Bengali 
poems from _https://www.tagoreweb.in/_. Additionally, the English titles needed manual editing. This is because they 
either had spelling mistakes or used syntax not found in the downloaded version. Finally, after all of this editing, the
entire high-fidelity BN-EN dataset was ready: `parallel_text.csv`.

### Train/Test

For training my model, I wanted to use most of the poems, but leave 1 for evaluation - _Where the mind is without fear_. This is the only poem that I can sort of understand deeply 😅.

## Model Training

I tried my best to use my local AMD RX 560 GPU for training. However, I realized that no matter what, it's pretty much
impossible to do any sort of tuning on this card in 2026, as the necessary libraries are not supported by it. So, I 
decided to move my setup to my university cluster - I was only using it when literally nobody else was logged on! As I 
was on the cluster, I had access to a lovely **NVIDIA A100 80GB card**. Thus, I decided to forgo LoRA and did **full
fine-tuning**! This is the first time I did full SFT & I could see that pretty much the entire card was needed for a 
4B Qwen3 model! I used the BASE variant as I wanted to see what behavior I could get without their post-training layer.

I tested 2 models - `Qwen3-0.6B` and `Qwen3-4B`. Both models were trained under the same settings 
(see `model_training.py` for hyperparameters).

## Evaluation

The only poem which I can sort of understand is _Where the mind is without fear_ 😅. As such, I used it as an evaluation
case. I'm providing the gold reference to start and then **worst to best** translations.

### A. **Gold Translation** (By Tagore himself)

> _Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high;_ \
> _Where knowledge is free;_ \
> _Where the world has not been broken up into fragments by narrow domestic walls;_ \
> _Where words come out from the depth of truth;_ \
> _Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards perfection;_ \
> _Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way into the dreary desert sand of dead habit;_ \
> _Where the mind is led forward by thee into ever-widening thought and action?_ \
> _Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake._

### B. 0.6B (Trained) Translation

> _What is the secret of the joy of life?_ \
> _What is the highest of joys?_ \
> _What is the refuge of the soul in the world of this life?_ \
> _What is the holy place of the heart where the thoughts of the world meet and confuse?_ ... (repeats)

### C. 4B (Base-Untrained) Translation

> _The mind where there is no fear, the head where there is no pride,_\
> _the knowledge where there is no bondage,_ \
> _the place where the boundaries of the house are not within the courtyard,_ \
> _where the sun's rays do not divide the water into small parts,_ \
> _where the words flow out from the heart's source,_ \
> _where the current of the river flows from place to place,_ \
> _from direction to direction, in countless forms of fulfillment,_ \
> _the place where the insignificant actions of the desert are not swallowed by the current of judgment,_ \
> _where the power is not lost; in that place, you are the leader of all work, the master of all thoughts, the bringer of joy._ \
> _O Father, make it a heaven in India._

### D. 4B (Trained) Translation

> [!NOTE]
> This translation was generated using the OLD_SYSTEM_PROMPT - see `src/common/prompts.py`. I later updated it to a better one.

> _In the heart where there is no fear,_ \
> _in the mind where there is no ceiling,_ \
> _in the intellect where there is no barrier,_ \
> _in the home where the walls are down and the sky is the roof,_ \
> _in the speech that springs from the heart’s fountain,_ \
> _in the stream of life that flows from country to country, from shore to shore,_ \
> _in the power that knows no let or hindrance,_ \
> _in the strength that knows no rest,_ \
> _in the ever-active master that directs all work with love—there only strike,_ \
> _O my father, and only touch the heaven of India._

## Discussion

I make the following observations,

**(Small quantity + High quality) >> (High quantity + Low quality) data**: Think about how many samples were used to 
train the model - Only 102 **high quality** human authored instances. Just with that, notice the quality of translation 
in output (D). The model has successfully learned to capture _Tagore's_ meaning in Bengali and his metaphors. This just
goes to show how important post-training is. While the model learns Bengali/English representations during pre-training,
using a well curated dataset in post helps to solve more complex tasks - translating these poems is no small feat, even 
for skilled human poets 😅.

**4B is the sweet spot**: Translations from the 0.6B variant shows why scale matters. At 600M parameters, the model is
struggling to capture meaning, let alone perform translation. This indicates that these models are really more suitable
for edge devices, rather than for attempting more complex tasks.

**With/without SFT**: Finally, we see the impact of post-training when examining the trained v.s. untrained 4B model. 
The untrained 4B (Base) Qwen _kind of_ gets the translation correct. However, it does so by interpreting the poem 
**literally**. For example, it distorts the metaphor of the _unchained mind_,
- Untrained: _boundaries of the house are not within the courtyard_. 👎
- Trained: _where the walls are down and the sky is the roof_. 👍

This just lends further credence to the positive effect of post-training.

## Future Work

I would like to come back to my _Shakespearean_ translation topic in the future. However, I need to find a way to 
generate that style of data to train my model. If I am stuck to my ground on not using synthetic samples, I'm not sure
whether this would even be possible! As for my current setup, it would be fun to see if I can add an RL component to 
see if I can create new Tagore style poetry 😅

---

# PART-B: DPO

**Attempting Future Work**

I wasn't content with stopping at SFT. As this was a passion project, I wanted to push myself further. Although I've 
read RLHF theory, I've never gotten around to doing anything with it, mainly because none of my projects required it.
As such, I decided to try incorporating some form of it here. The **idea** was simple: **get the SFT checkpoint to 
generate better translations, in line with some _qualitative preferences_.** While this wasn't the future work that I
had mentioned above, it still gave me a good reason to dabble in RLHF.

I decided to use DPO (Direct Preference Optimization) over the recently popular GRPO (Group Relative PO). This is 
because the task is more _qualitative_, i.e., it is not straightforward to create a reward function to judge how good/bad
a poem is.

Of course, it would have been great if I just had some high-quality preference data lying about. But, alas, that was
not to be 😅. So, I had to assemble my own dataset (again) to get this party started! I'll describe the overall
workflow I followed and the issues that came up.

## Preference Data Curation

Unfortunately, I had to break my resolve on no-synthetic data 🥲. If I hadn't, it would have taken me quite a long time,
to say the least, to understand the poems and judge multiple translations. As there were many moving parts to this
phase of the project, I decided to save myself some trouble and generate **synthetic-preference data**. Essentially,
this makes it **RLLF (RL with LLM Feedback)** 😅.

Before generating the preference data, I **re-trained the base 4B model with a new prompt which would allow for more
structured generation, for easier parsing**. The model was trained to write its translations inside 
`<translation> </translation>` XML tags. The data was then generated as follows,

1. Sampled 100 Tagore poems, that were not a part of Gitanjali (as they were already used).
2. Used the SFT checkpoint to generate three translations per poem. I removed those generations that could not be 
parsed. This left some poems with only one clean generation. These samples were removed, as we need at least two to 
ask a model to choose the best and worst one.
3. I prompted a much stronger **Qwen3-32B** LLM to determine which translation it felt was the best, and which was the 
worst. This also led to a few samples getting removed due to Qwen's generation errors.
4. Ultimately, all of this yielded a small preference set of ~80 samples.

## Model Training

As this was the first time I've done DPO, it took a little trial and error to get the optimal hyperparameters. But, 
the first lesson which screamed at me was, **RLHF is complex** 💀! Not only does it require a TON of compute, it's not 
easy to optimize either. Here, I had to use two GPUs and HuggingFace accelerate to train the model in 
DDP (Distributed Data Parallel), because fitting two models (policy/reference) on 1 card was impossible. Luckily I was 
still on my cluster which gave me access to another 80 GB card! All hyperparameters are noted in the training script.

## Evaluation

Again, I used _where the mind is without fear_ to evaluate the quality of the DPO checkpoint. First, I'll provide the
output from the new SFT trained model and then the DPO one.

### A. SFT Checkpoint

> _The mind that is free from fear,_ \
> _the heart that is high, the intellect that is unshackled,_ \
> _the home that has no walls—there, in that inwardmost chamber, the light of the day never enters._ \
> _There the words come out from the heart’s fountain, and the stream of thought runs from country to country, from shore to shore, in a myriad channels of meaning._ \
> _There the petty rules of usage have no hold, and the stream of action runs strong and free, unchecked by the censorious eye._ \
> _There the master hand guides the work of every moment, and there the touch of the cruel is never felt._ \
> _O bring thy heaven of joy to this land._

### B. SFT + DPO Checkpoint

> _Where the heart is free from fear, where the head is high_, \
> _Where the mind is unshackled, there the walls of the house are not built, and the light of the universal day shines in the inner court._ \
> _Where speech comes from the fountain of the heart and breaks forth in streams of varied meanings,_ \
> _Where the river of action flows from land to land, from shore to shore, in countless channels of usefulness, there customs and laws are not fetters, and the strong man is not lord._ \
> _Where thou art ever the master of all work, the lord of thought and feeling, there the cruel stroke of tyranny is not felt,_ \
> _O my father, let thy country awake._

## Discussion

I make the following observations, 

**SFT Output**: The new SFT output is slightly inferior to the previous one. I believe that this is due to the additional format
constraint that I imposed for the model. Despite that, it does capture some imagery well, such as _intellect that is unshackled_ and
_mind that is free from fear_. Overall, it's a decent first attempt translation, but it does lack the poetic edge that we are looking for.

**SFT + DPO**: Now that the model has learned _what_ to translate (SFT), it needs to pickup cues on what separates a good from a bad
translation, which is enabled by DPO. As we can see here, this comes through in this phase. Consider these,

| SFT Only 👎                               | SFT + DPO 👍                                    |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|
| _touch of the cruel is never felt_        | _there the cruel stroke of tyranny is not felt_ |
| _O bring thy heaven of joy to this land._ | _O my father, let thy country awake._           |

These translations not only _feels_ more coherent, but are surprisingly more accurate! This is incredible to witness! At
4B parameters, we have been pushing the limits of what these models can do! Just by using a decent size dataset, with a
mix of synthetic + human curated information, we are able to view capabilities similar to an early career literary 
expert.

---

# Lessons Learned 

These are certain takeaways from this project, either from a qualitative/engineering perspective,

**Be cautious with Flash Attention 🚧**: When I tried SFT training with Flash Attention (FA), I noticed that while the loss was steadily dropping,
the resulting model was qualitatively quite poor. It was generating text in different languages, doing endless repetitions, etc. I think 
for such a complex task + model scale, the optimization tricks employed by FA kind of wrecks the model. On the other hand, when doing 
inference with the 32B model, FA is fine, which indicates that at scale, the model is more resilient to those tricks. 

**Look beyond loss 🔍**: Just because the loss decreases doesn't necessarily mean you have a better model. Keep on checking whether the model 
qualitatively achieves what you are looking for.

**Challenge conventional wisdom 🧑‍⚖️**: Usually, it is recommended to compute loss for assistant tokens only during SFT.
However, as the size of the dataset is small, the task is complex, and the model has to juggle two languages, I felt 
that it would be better to use regular causal loss. My intuition was right! When I trained the model with the recommended 
strategy, the performance degraded because the model simply did not have enough samples to learn the instructions well.

**RL is scary 🧟**: While it is exciting, RL does take much more time to truly appreciate and implement. The number of 
hyperparameters, hardware requirements, and overall method complexities, make it less straightforward to use.

**DPO learning rate**: I've heard RL algorithms to be notoriously difficult to optimize. However, I experienced that with this
project! When I used the same SFT learning rate here, the loss jumped from an astronomically high value to 0 in just 1 step. So,
I had to drastically reduce the learning rate which made training more stable.

**DPO Coin Flip 🪙**: If you see your DPO training loss to be around 0.69, that's essentially, ln(2). This means, that 
the model is unsure of either the chosen/rejected preference. If the final training loss stays at this value, then you know
that your model really hasn't learned anything. So, experiment with the learning rate, and other parameters to try to 
lower that loss - but not too much though, othewise it'll overfit 😅

___

# Code Execution Instructions

Everything works with Python 3.9. Just have `torch, transformers, trl, accelerate` installed. You will need 1 80 GB GPU
for SFT and 2 for DPO. Follow these steps to reproduce the results. The dataset is already generated so you can skip
that part.

## SFT

SFT scripts are located inside `src/SFT_code/`

1. Data is processed inside `Raw Data Processing.ipynb`
2. Training data and main evaluation sample generated by `train_test_data_gen.py`.
3. Model is trained with `training.py`

## DPO

DPO scripts are located inside `src/DPO_code/`

1. Sample 100 poems using `dpo_sample_data.py`
2. Generate and parse translations with `translation_gen.py` and `parse_raw_translations.py`
3. Generate and parse preferences with `preference_gen.py` and `parse_raw_preferences.py`
4. Finally, train the model with `acclerate launch train.py` (Make sure to config accelerate for multi-GPU/bf16 training.)